# AI assisted grading for the architecture use case

## How can AI reduce our 8-hour average grading time?

### Automatically rating language clarity and correctness

LLMs text processing capabilities can rate our candidates ADRs and narrative style using clear,
objective criteria.
Our AI solution can select the most representative samples with problems and propose alternative phrasing.

It is good to automatize this because:

* Written communication is a key skill for architects
* Rating text is a repetitive boring task for architects who tend to prefer technical issues
* Candidates will try to provide clear, readable text that would also help with the grading problem.
* It is hard to rate English in a 100 % objetive way specially when there are 300 Software consultants involved. So the
  use of AI can improve the grading consistency and fairness.

### Do ADR, Architecture styles and architecture characteristics, make sense with the context?

Our good LLM can check the text against some solutions.
Given the limited number of cases (5) and possible styles or characteristics, we can easily have a good database of
responses for each case.

We can always add any some solutions to our database specifying why some solutions may be more or less appropriate
than others and use RAG to provide predefined responses that can be doubled checked by our experts.

### Automatically detect inconsistency issues

* Did the candidate use the architecture characteristics as drivers in the ADR design?

### Provide sources and detailed explanations for a given problem

Let's assume that our software consultants are the only ones able to detect issues.
We can assume that explaining why can become the boring and sometimes repetitive part of the grading.

Our architects could try to type `XXX with a relational database won't scale, speciall if we create reports from it`
and our AI system could search from previous corrections and a database or architecture knowledge base with resources
about this specific issue.
This autogenerated text is just indicative and can be modified like current IDE AI autocompletion.

## What AI is probably not ready yet

## Grade the full exercise

If AI can't replace architects (at least yet), it probably can't grade the full exercise.
There are still limitations like context windows that would prevent so.

## Diagram Understanding & Analysis.

While AI is probably able to parse some text from images, it probably is not yet ready to evaluate:

* The clarity of the diagrams
* If the diagramas corresponds to the ADRs
* If the solution in the diagram solves the problem
* Potential implications of the solution.
* Grading partial solutions

Our expert architects can probably understand those problems quite fast in a few views. Multi-format processing 
is harder than just LLM. And even then, LLMs are not perfect fit for reasoning problems. 
